I recently created a video on my YouTube
channel about how to be a great panelist
should you ever be asked to be on a
panel at a conference or another event
that video should be popping up there
somewhere in the corner and this video
is for those who have been asked or
volunteered to be a moderator of a panel
because moderating a panel is a
challenge unto itself I had this idea
for creating these two videos because
I've been going to toast my Masters for
the last eight years and one of our
Toast Masters club members recently
hosted a panel and it was the first time
I had seen a panel done at a
Toastmasters meeting which is crazy
because when you go to actual
conferences usually more than half of
the sessions are related to panels and
being on a panel or moderating a panel
is much different than speaking as just
yourself on stage to many people out in
the crowd so I wanted wanted to create
these two videos to give you some
inspiration and confidence going into a
panel session whether you're a panelist
which is that other video or in this
video moderating a panel yourself hey
everyone my name is Wade Patterson my
whole YouTube channel is all about
impactful communication very simply if
you want to be a better Communicator
consider subscribing to my channel the
first step to moderating a great panel
is to pick an interesting subject if you
have the choice of what subject you're
going to be covering and number two is
to pick great panelists so in terms of
the subject I want you to think about if
you were attending an event and there
were many options on the agenda what
could you describe that would really
draw in your attention maybe that's a
catchy title that really spices up the
subject matter that you're going to be
covering or an interesting one or two
sentences as part of that panel
description put a lot of thought into
that because that simple Act of naming
your panel and giving it a great
description could be the difference in
whether many people attend that panel
session especially if you're competing
with other sessions or much a much
smaller amount of people if it doesn't
sound that interesting or it sounds
generic so you want to think up
something that is going to be
interesting and add value to your
audience and then you want to pick great
panelists and there can be a lot of
factors that go into this you may be in
a situation where you have zero Choice
over the panelists but if you do have
the opportunity try to pick individuals
who obviously are experienced and can
share a lot of knowledge with regard to
the subject but also aim to have a
little bit of a
diversity in terms of the panelists and
diversity comes in many forms the first
of course is diversity of people whether
that that's different backgrounds
whether that's a nice balance of men and
women but then also diversity of
opinions because there is nothing worse
than watching or listening to a panel
discussion and all the panelists say the
exact same thing where one panelist
gives an answer they answer the question
and then the moderator says okay how
about you Susie and Susie says yeah
exactly what Peter just said there's no
point having multiple people you could
just have one person if that was the
scenario so you want to ensure that not
that people are going to like disagree
per se but that they'll bring different
perspectives to your panel conversation
and offer different points of view
beyond the diversity of your panelists
if you're wondering about how many
panelists is the right number it varies
but often I think two or three is the
magic number if you have too many more
than that they won't get a lot of
speaking time likely and if you only
have one panelist it's kind of more like
an interview style and you're only
getting one perspective so I think two
or three panelists is the right number
once you picked your panelist you want
to ensure that these people are prepared
and that you are prepared and the best
panel moderators often set up a
pre-interview call that can be over Zoom
it can be in person if you're in the
same location but you want to get the
panelists together first off so they can
familiarize themselves with each other
if they've never met in the past but
second so that you can explain all of
the housekeeping items and the structure
and what they can expect because the
more prepared your panelists are the
more they're going to relax when it
comes to the actual event and they will
answer in a natural way because there's
not a lot of surprises or shocks that
are going to come at them on the day of
while you're meeting with your panelist
you may want to to give them some key
information such as the topics and
themes that you hope to discuss now I'm
not saying you have to give the
panelists their questions verbatim
because I actually think as a good
moderator you may Veer away from
questions that you are prepared on
asking depending how the panel goes so
you need to be willing to adapt but give
them a general idea of the themes of
what you're going to be discussing so
that they can start to formulate
effective responses in their own minds
when it comes to the day of your panel
remember that your goal as moderator is
to make your panelist shine and to give
the audience a great session to start
off the panel you can give a little bit
of an introduction but don't spend too
much time doing this because you want to
give your panelists the maximum amount
of time behind the mic to give their
answers and to really be seen as the
experts on the subject but you can give
a short introduction with which sets the
tone for the audience and then I always
think it's a great idea to have a quick
little bio or information about the
panelists of course you can ask the
panelist to introduce themselves but I
always find hosts or moderators who are
able to give the audience that
information upfront first off come
across as more prepared but second it's
a nice thing for the panelists they come
on stage they've been introduced
properly and now they can jump right
into the subject matter one of the
trickier parts of moderating a panel is
ensuring that there's a level of balance
in speaking time amongst the panelists
and great panelists should be able to
acknowledge this and realize if they're
talking a little bit long but sometimes
that doesn't happen and people like to
hog the microphone and if you need to
jump in which I suggest you do if they
are talking for an abnormally long
amount of time do so with Grace because
that individual may not realize that
they've been talking way too long and
you don't want to take away their
enthusiasm but at the same time you want
to respect the rest of the panelists and
give them an opportunity to shine as
well so my suggestion is if somebody is
talking for an extraordinary amount of
time find your spot maybe in between
sentences to jump in and say Julie
that's great information thank you so
much I want to ensure all the panelists
get a chance to chime in on this Bob
what are your thoughts on what Julie was
just saying something like that where
it's not offensive you're not being rude
to Julie you're explaining that she's
given a great answer thank you so much
for that insight and that knowledge and
now over to Bob to keep things flowing
hopefully this is something you never
have to deal with with moderating a
panel I will say it's pretty rare
because most people have that level of
awareness but I have seen it from time
to time and the times that I've
witnessed a moderator observing this and
not doing anything it feels awkward and
I think the whole audience will respect
the fact if you are the moderator that
you can jump in and ensure that your
panel has a great flow to it the best
panel moderators don't rely too heavily
on notes I know this is difficult
because you have questions prepared that
you're hoping to ask these individuals
and you're probably thinking how on
Earth can I keep all of these questions
straight in my head especially if I've
told some of the panelists what I'm
going to ask them I need to make sure
that the questions aren't throwing them
off I understand those are all valid
concerns the first tip is to practice
without your notes as much as possible
so that these topics are fresh in your
head when you go to deliver the actual
panel or moderate the actual panel but
the second piece of advice is to have q
cards or subtle
information rather than a big piece of
paper that you're holding up reading off
questions and if you have the luxury of
having a side table so if you're the
moderator and you have your panelist
beside you and you have a little side
table in between that's the perfect
place to keep your notes and then you
can ask the question maintain eye
contact as the panelists are answering
give them those non-verbal cues but then
from time to time you can glance down as
a little reminder to the question that
you're going to ask next earlier I
mentioned the importance of keeping the
time within the panelist somewhat even
the next tip is to be observant or
understand the full timing of the panel
because usually panel sessions happen at
conferences or events where there's a
much larger agenda and you going too
long with your panel or making it not
long enough could really impact the
agenda and the rest of the day's events
so be mindful of the total amount of
time and if there's a particular subject
matter that you really want to talk
about but you notice the panel is going
slower in terms of wow I was going to
ask three more questions before I got to
this really important topic and half our
time is already done pivot transition
ask that really important question
adjust the structure of the interview
the panelist will understand what you're
doing because you want to deliver the
audience with the most valuable
information and that is your job and
duty to make the panelist shine to keep
everything on time but also to ensure
that the best questions are being asked
and the best information is being given
out great panel moderators also
incorporate the audience when possible
you can do this in a variety of ways but
one of my favorite things to do when
moderating a panel is to tell the
audience early what the structure is and
encourage them to ask questions by
saying you know the best panels I've
ever moderated are the ones where the
audience ask the majority of the
questions therefore we have a couple of
mics being run around put up your hand
if you have a question or maybe you have
a stationary microphone and you
encourage the audience to go line up if
they do have a question maybe you don't
want it to be dominated by audience
questions that's okay so you can set the
tone by saying at the end of the session
we're going to have about 5 minutes so
if there's a burning question that you
have be prepared for the end I promise
we'll get to a few questions at that
point I've also seen panels incorporate
technology so there's certain apps and
websites one that comes to mind is
called mentimeter where you can have the
audience type in their questions and if
you have a screen or a display those
questions will pop up in real time or if
you don't you can have the app on your
phone and you will see the questions
coming in that takes a a little bit of
multitasking to see the audience
questions but it's a great way to
incorporate the audience and ensure that
the things that are important to them
are getting answered as well at the end
of the panel you want to wrap it up very
nicely wrap it up with a bow thank your
panelists for their time if there's an
opportunity to summarize some of the
points that is another kind of Next
Level skill to be able to be thinking as
they're responding doing that active
listening and then at the end talk about
some of the major themes that were
covered and some points do so but just
like the introduction don't take too
much time away from the panelists in
order to do your summary the most
important thing is that you thank them
and that you deliver any housekeeping or
important items to the audience that
they need to know whether that's part of
the bigger conference or how they can
get in touch with these panelists if
they have further questions information
like that I hope this video on how to
moderate a panel session at a conference
or other event was beneficial to all of
you moderators by the way if you're
being asked to moderate a panel good for
you you clearly have a great skill set
in dealing with people so that is
fantastic and don't forget about the
Sister video to this one which is how to
be a great panelist that will be linked
to at the bottom regardless of how you
landed on this video thank you so much
for taking the time to watch please
consider subscribing to my channel
because I will continue to put out
videos to make you a better public
speaker and overall a better
Communicator thanks so much and I'll
catch you on the next video